# NBA Rookie Predictions

by Akash Kumar (ajk279) and Pranav Darbha (pd353)

Research Question: Can we predict the performance of an NBA player three years down the line using their statistics from the rookie season?

In the annual NBA Draft, 60 players from American universities and other leagues around the world are chosen in the hope that they can be strong players in the world's most competitive basketball league. Many more are signed as undrafted free agents. For each pick, teams spend thousands of hours scouting prospects, hoping that they can find the player with the right fit who will succeed in their team's environment. These players then spend their first year in a high-pressure environment, learning on the job. The volatility of the rookie season can make it difficult to predict how a player will perform further into their NBA career. There are those who succeeded in their first taste of the NBA and never looked back like LeBron James. However, there are many at the opposite end of the spectrum like 2013-14 Rookie of the Year Michael Carter-Williams who has continually regressed since that first year.

With the plethora of NBA data available for draft classes throughout the years, we hope to be able to predict the performance of 2016-17 Rookies in the upcoming season. We plan on using datasets from www.basketball-reference.com containing player data from 2000 onwards. We plan on using both traditional metrics like points, rebounds and assists as well as advanced statistics like Player Efficiency Ratings and Value Over Replacement Player. We hope that we can predict their performance in the NBA as measured by the same statistics we used from their Rookie Year. We would also like to find which statistics are most indicative of future performance. Once a model is built, we can evaluate its performance by looking at the stats of the 2016-17 Rookies in their fourth NBA season as it begins on October 4th.
